## Max feedrate
Posted on **2017-04-21 18:36:34** by **MakerMark**:

Does the firmware or GC have limits to the max feedrate that would be allowed? 24.25in/min was the feedrate that I could measure using g-code generated by Easel. I created a 20in line on the y-axis and recorded the time on a stopwatch. When using speeds less than 24.25in/min, the time recordings taken on my stopwatch were accurate. Before going into too much more research, I was wondering if there were soft limits.  Thanks!

---

Posted on **2017-04-21 19:50:39** by **Bar**:

Yes, I added a soft limit at 25ipm a couple weeks back because that's about the max the feedback system can keep up at right now, if you go faster than that it still cuts, but the accuracy starts to become much worse. I thought it was better to limit it than to leave everyone with confusing results. What do you think?

---

Posted on **2017-04-21 20:06:23** by **carlosrivers**:

How much worse is the accuracy?

---

Posted on **2017-04-21 20:09:22** by **MakerMark**:

I think it's fine to leave in the soft limit. One less variable as we work to dial things in. I'm assuming this is the line?

> feedrate = constrain(feedrate, 1, 25*_inchesToMMConversion);

I'll run a few tests with lighter bricks to see if the speed/accuracy are related later this weekend.

---

Posted on **2017-04-21 20:32:40** by **Bar**:

@carlosrivers it really depends on the shape and how fast you are cutting. Basically sometimes it's fine, other times you get strange results. I should have it all ironed out in a couple weeks.



@MakerMark I agree that anything we can eliminate as an issue for the next few weeks is probably for the best, we've got enough to keep track of. You are spot on that is the line, feel free to change it it if you want to experiment with going faster. My guess is that the issues have more to do with the way the feedback control system is set up, than with the weight of the sled, but I could be completely wrong! The more we know, the more we know.

---

Posted on **2017-04-22 12:59:39** by **MakerMark**:

My 1st test was to run the built-in feedback test function at various feed rates. Good news is that the error rate starts to level off after 80in/min. I stopped testing at 100in/min due to [my error](https://github.com/MaslowCNC/GroundControl/issues/222), but I'll start back tomorrow.   [Feedrate_Errorrate](/images/am/amwp_feedrate_errorrate.png.jpg)

---

Posted on **2017-04-23 16:18:11** by **MakerMark**:

The error rate seemed small to me when running the feedback test but when cutting it made a big difference 😜



Using the same g-code and controlling the speed via firmware limits. The cut on top was at 100in/min and bottom was 30in/min. (The z depth issues are my fault. Warped board and I should have used more hold down screws would have helped).  [Image](/images/m7/m7lz_image.jpeg.jpg)  I love the results on both signs. The top one really gets the point across.

---

Posted on **2017-04-23 16:23:54** by **rancher**:

Those are GREAT!  The top one is amazing.  Visually, I mean, I love it too.  The feedrate is also amazing, I can not believe it did that well going that fast.

---

Posted on **2017-04-29 19:46:15** by **MakerMark**:

@Bar - Your guess was spot on.  I ran the tests again after lowering the weight and they were within the margin of error. These are the avg from 15 test runs under each condition. 

Heavy sled = 1.09mm @ 25ipm and 2.17mm @ 100ipm

lighter sled = 1.01mm @ 25ipm and 2.2mm @ 100ipm

---

