## +15mm
Posted on **2017-04-30 12:03:02** by **rancher**:

Seems to be the magic number for sled width settings, as per Gero's extensive research.  I made a test pattern with 1"x.126" horizontal pockets spaced 36" apart vertically.  Using my true sled width, I was 35.5" from pocket to pocket.  Adding 15mm and I cut right at 36".

---

Posted on **2017-04-30 12:05:05** by **Bar**:

It's good we're all consistent. 



Anyone have any theories on why +15mm?

---

Posted on **2017-04-30 14:39:37** by **davidlang**:

I think we need to experiment with different ways of fastening the chain to make sure that the pivot points are where we expect them to be.



On one CNC I built, I took a couple bolts and machined the head off and drilled a hole so that I could use a master link to connect the chain to the bolt [Chain_end](/images/Ig/y9/Igy9_chain_end.jpg.jpg) 



If someone could do something like this, or use a nail/bolt/screw through the link so that we know for sure where it is pivoting, that would be useful.



Also, could you check if the error is the same in all four corners as it is in the center? If it is, then I think it's a sled problem, if it isn't, we have a different problem and the tweaks we are making just happen to work in the center.



another test would be to cut a horizontal line down the length of the board (where the sled is tilting significantly from one side to the other) and see if it's straight.



I have a suspicion that the chain length is not quite what we think it is, that we have an assumption that the chain is tangential to the top of the motor gears and doesn't take into account the wr ap around the gears and the effect that has at different positions. This error will be far more significant as you move left to right than working near the center.

---

Posted on **2017-04-30 17:42:40** by **rollandelliott**:

Maybe this is silly idea, but seeing as how important the measurements of the sled are it might be worth it to some to get it laser cut. I use a company out of PA and he has the good service and prices, especially for low volume keithg222@gmail.com is his email. Not sure if he stocks wood, but steel would be more durable and not cost much more. Is the sled available as a dxf file anywhere?

---

Posted on **2017-04-30 17:54:29** by **Bar**:

@davidlang I think that's a great idea and an important test. Like you said, that would really let us tell if we're seeing some sort of hinging behavior we don't fully understand, or if the internal math is off by 15mm for some reason



@rollandelliot I don't think it's a silly idea at all. Ultimately I think shipping the sled with the machine is a good idea. We've got to find a way to do it and keep the cost down especially with shipping. Our international shipping costs being affordable are pretty heavily dependent on the machine fitting in a USPS flat rate box. We have the steel brackets water jet cut already, so one option would be to ship both brackets as a single unit, that way we would know the spacing absolutely.



I'm working on an automated machine dimension calibration process right now which will take some of the human factor out of the process (no tape measure required). Here's the beginning:  [Step Zero](/images/Pk/Kn/PkKn_stepone.jpg.jpg) ,  [Step One](/images/xl/BG/xlBG_steptwo.jpg.jpg)

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 00:53:49** by **scottsm**:

I just finished cutting an 80" x 36" [grid](/images/Pd/AQ/PdAQ_80x36grid.png.jpg). The three verticals are plumb, straight and true. The lower horizontal bows up 0.125" in the center, the middle horizontal bows up 0.3125" in the middle and the upper horizontal bows up 0.6875 in the middle.

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 02:32:27** by **davidlang**:

ok, that tells me that there is some other error in the model and widening the chain mount spacing is not really the right answer.



I wish you had a video of it cutting this grid. I would be very curious if the sled tilt changes noticeably during the vertical cuts.



If you change the chain mount spacing back to what it should be, do the horizontal cuts get straighter? (now that we know the shape of the problem so to speak, a single pass near the top or bottom should be enough to see the issue)

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 03:23:47** by **davidlang**:

one source of error (probably small) is that the math assumes that the center of gravity is in the center of the sled.



I know that this is wrong because the router isn't symmetric, and then the Z axis gets added to one side.



could someone do a quick test and see how far off this makes things? I'm guessing it's only a couple mm, but I'm trying to double-check all assumptions.

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 03:47:00** by **davidlang**:

I'm pretty sure that the current math computing the chain length is wrong in that it doesn't account for the chain that is wrapped around the sprockets from the vertical. It calculates where the chain leaves the sprockets on a tangent and uses that as an offset, but if it accounted for the chain wrapped around the sprocket it would have to do a calculation involving pi, and I don't see that anywere (and the radius of the sprocket is used in very few places)



I'm going through and trying to create a model I can understand of the machine positioning, and then I'll need to make an inverse of it to match what's needed here.

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 03:56:51** by **davidlang**:

If I'm correct about this oversight, the chain lengths are off by about 6mm each when the sled is at the center (ranging from ~1.5mm when the sled is at the far top to ~14mm when it's at the near bottom)

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 04:50:37** by **davidlang**:

I also think that h3 is defined incorrectly. It's listed as the distance from the bit down to the center of gravity, but to properly figure the torque of the chains on the sled, the math would have to take into account both the distance from the line between the chains and the bit, and the distance from the bit to the center of gravity, but the h3 parameter only appears in one place and is not combined with 's' at that point.



I'd guess that h3 is supposed to be the distance from the line between the chains and the center of gravity, not between the bit and CG)

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 08:13:35** by **Bar**:

That is an excellent catch and some very good deduction, I'll contact Keith (who generously derived the kinematics for us) and see if I can get him in this forum thread, that sounds like the best way to be sure.

---

Posted on **2017-05-01 21:53:56** by **Bar**:

I followed up with Keith and his answer was detailed and quick as always. I'll need to dig into it more in the morning to fully understand it, but here is the full text (his responses in bold):



The two questions that I couldn't answer were:



1) How is the chain position on the sprocket calculated, and where is it measured from? 

*The easy part of this answer is that chain length is the distance from 12 o'clock on the sprocket to the tangent point plus the distance from the tangent point to the sled attachment, but all that's computed after the system geometry is solved for a given (x,y) pair.  



I found it algebraically simplest to stipulate that the  chains are attached to the vertical lines passing through the center of the sprocket at a location that yields an equivalent system geometry.  Refer to the figure in my derivation.  I extend the chains in a straight line from where they are tangent to their respective sprockets to where they intersect the vertical lines.  The points of intersect are Y1+and Y2+.  The chain length formulae include the transform back to the t welve o'clock attachment.



The chain length equations u and v are functions of the unknowns y1+, y2+, psi1, psi2, lambda and gamma.  psi1 and psi2 are functions of the tilt angle phi (equation h).  Lambda and gamma are functions of y1+, psi1, psi2, and y2+ (equations j and k).  Thus if we can solve for y1+, y2+ and phi, we can plug them into equations h,  j and k to get lambda and gamma and use these intermediate results to solve equations u and v.   Unfortunately, the three equations in the three unknowns y1+, Y2+ and psi (equations are non-linear don't have a closed form solution (at least not that I know of) so they are solved with an initial guess followed by a rapidly converging Newton-Raphson iteration.



For those who aren't helped by this explanation, I'm afraid you'll have to slog through the derivations in my original paper.  Feel free to ask about things that aren't clear and/or what terms and symbols mean.  The derivation is based on the premise that since the sled isn't rotating or falling, the forces are in equilibrium as stated in equations a, b and c.  From there its an application of analytic geometry.  If you're not familiar with analytic geometry and vector algebra, it's probably best to watch Bar's video of the Maslow carving a straight line and take it as proof that the derivation is correct ... enough.*



2) How is h3 parameter used? Where is it measured from and to?

*h3 is the distance from the router bit to the center of mass (sometimes referred to as center of gravity) of the sled.  The mass of the sled exerts a torque about the bit which is countered by the torques exerted by the chains.  See equation c and equation 1, which is derived from c.  Note that the weight of the sled drops out.  This is because if the weight changes, the forces in the chains change proportionately countering the weight change leaving distances from the attach points to the bit (h)  and the distance from the bit to the center of mass to determine the tilt of the sled.*



I'm pretty sure that the current math computing the chain length is wrong in that it doesn't account for the chain that is wrapped around the sprockets from the vertical. It calculates where the chain leaves the sprockets on a tangent and uses that as an offset, but if it accounted for the chain wrapped around the sprocket it would have to do a calculation involving pi, and I don't see that anywere (and the radius of the sprocket is used in very few places)



 *   The angles lambda and gamma are returned in radians from the atan function.  The lengths to twelve o'clock are computed by multiplying  the radius times the angle.  No pi needed since the angles are in radians.*



I also think that h3 is defined incorrectly. It's listed as the distance from the bit down to the center of gravity, but to properly figure the torque of the chains on the sled, the math would have to take into account both the distance from the line between the chains and the bit, and the distance from the bit to the center of gravity, but the h3 parameter only appears in one place and is not combined with ‘s’ at that point.



*I'd guess that h3 is supposed to be the distance from the line between the chains and the center of gravity, not between the bit and CG)



    The axis of rotation is arbitrary.All that is necessary is to show that the sled is not rotating and not in translation which is done by balancing forces and moments.  I could just as easily have chosen one of the attachment points or the center of mass as the axis.  Equation a yields zero y force, equation b yields zero x force and equation c yields zero moment. 



None of this is to say there isn't a mistake somewhere that's yet to be found, although plugging the results into a precision drafting program did yield the correct x,y coordinates.

Thanks!*

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 00:21:07** by **davidlang**:

could you re-post a link to the paper he refers to?

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 02:04:39** by **davidlang**:

The only reason why the CG matters at all is because that is the point that the sled rotates around under the tension from the chains. The larger the distance from the chain mounts to the CG, the less it will tilt under the same conditions. The sled tilts enough for the CG to get close enough to the chain mount (vertical alignment) for the various force vectors to balance.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 02:16:28** by **davidlang**:

I am extremely grateful for Keith's efforts so far. The fact that we are not getting the right results on our beta test machines that the software is predicting means that there is something wrong somewhere.



I'm hoping that the system isn't so sensitive to errors that a few mm off causes us the problems we are seeing. I'm hoping that there is something else going on here.



the fact that a very large square shows has a different error in the top line than the bottom line makes me suspicious of the math. If it was an error in the construction of the machine (wrong dimensions being entered), I would expect that the error would be more consistent (similar shape top and bottom, possibly more extreme one place than the other)



I also think it's interesting that we appear to have the X dimension correct, it's the Y that varies as we move around (vertical lines are straight, horizontal lines are bowed)

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 09:00:39** by **badger666**:

Bar has told me that the horizontal cut he made some months ago was straight to within his ability to measure it.  I've asked him to verify this with a new cut. 



Meanwhile, if anyone who's getting curved horizontal cuts could take careful measurements of the sled and the distance between the sprockets it would be useful.  I'm particularly interested in the h3 measurement (center of bit to center of mass).  How are you finding the center of mass, the bit center, etc.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 09:06:28** by **badger666**:

And by distance between the sprockets I of course mean sprocket centers.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 09:46:02** by **Bar**:

[Here's](https://robotics.stackexchange.com/questions/10607/forward-and-revers-kinematics-for-modified-hanging-plotter) a link to Keith's beautiful write up of the math. I posted it on Stack Exchange so that it can be a collaborative effort. Stack Exchange allows anyone to propose a change or comment.



I did get a straight line all the way across to within my ability to measure, last time I ran the test. That was a month or more ago, so I think I'll run that test again soon.



My gut feeling is that we need a more repeatable method to calibrate. Having the test shape that we could all run and share results from was HUGE. We need something similar for calibration. I'm imagining a set of steps built into Ground Control that we can each run the process and compare results.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 10:30:41** by **TomTheWhittler**:

You could get one of these Wall Laser levels

http://www.homedepot.com/p/BLACK-DECKER-BullsEye-Auto-Leveling-Laser-Level-BDL170/100485508

to attach to the plywood to check straightness of router lines.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 10:45:19** by **davidlang**:

I suspect that the very straight cut that @bar made was near the center of the sheet.



what was reported is that the top was bowed up and the bottom bowed down, so that would make something cut around y=0 straight.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 11:35:11** by **Bar**:

That is a great point @davidlang. I believe I tested right down the middle.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 12:24:12** by **davidlang**:

I created http://lang.hm/maslow/testpattern3.nc that cuts three horizontal and three vertical lines (center and ~3" in from each edge of a 4x8 sheet), it should take ~20 min to cut

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 13:08:33** by **Bar**:

I will run that test. It looks like exactly what we need.



I want to finish the automated calibration procedure first so I can use that test as a metric to see how well the automated calibration works and so we can all have a basis to compare our results.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 13:30:27** by **badger666**:

This is a video Bar made some time ago showing a straight line traverse of the entire board.  He made another one that made a visible straight cut, but I can't find it.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skhjJnE5E2U

Here's another going across the bottom of the sheet:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=naxJlU2R0bQ&feature=youtu.be

I still can't find the one where you see a straight cut with the new code adjacent to a curved cut using the old code.  Maybe Bar can find it.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 13:59:58** by **Bar**:

I think that might have just been a picture in the update, but I'm not sure

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 14:09:16** by **badger666**:

davidlang wrote:

"I suspect that the very straight cut that @bar made was near the center of the sheet.  What was reported is that the top was bowed up and the bottom bowed down, so that would make something cut around y=0 straight."



stating that all lines bowed away from the center.



but scottsm wrote:



"I just finished cutting an 80“ x 36” grid. The three verticals are plumb, straight and true. The lower horizontal bows up 0.125“ in the center, the middle horizontal bows up 0.3125” in the middle and the upper horizontal bows up 0.6875 in the middle."



stating that all lines bowed up.  



If scottsm is correct, and Bar got a straight horizontal line, something has changed since Bar carved his line.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 14:18:07** by **scottsm**:

davidlang, the link to the test file is broken; there is no 'testpattern3.nc' in that directory ('testpattern2.nc' is there, though).

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 14:23:36** by **davidlang**:

oops, missed copying it, fixed.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 14:24:06** by **davidlang**:

@badger, I misread that, thanks for the correction

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 16:31:18** by **scottsm**:

I've done some more testing with a grid similar to davidlang's, and it does seem to be vey sensitive to the 'Distance between sled mounting points' setting.  The other day my horizontal measurements were all arcing up (high in the center) with the greatest arc at the top and all three verticals were plumb.

 My sled had the mounting points on the 120-degree orientation that gives a DBSMP of around 310mm. (Is that where the default value in main.py comes from? It's very different from the value I measure for the 90-degree orientation of the regular sled and the temporary sled. Maybe I'm measuring this wrong? :( )

 I thought to try the 90-degree mounting point arrangement, and with that all the horizontals arced down, still greatest at the top - 3/4”, 5/16” and 1/8”. This time the edge verticals sloped out 3/8” at the top. I’ve never been sure of exactly how to measure the sled width and this suggests that I was pretty far off.

 Today I went back to the 120-degree arrangement thinking that my measurement would be a smaller part of the whole dimension, and I added 4mm to the  previous 310mm value because my 6” square was wide by 1/16” or so. This gave me a 6” square. I ran the grid and the three horizontals are: top, 1/8” low in center; middle, flat; bottom, 1/8” low on the right side but seems straight across the board. The verticals are not plumb: they are 72.125” center-to-center at the top, 72” in the middle, and 71.75” at the bottom end.

 I see that Bar has been polishing up the auto calibration, I think that will help a lot! :)

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 16:49:48** by **Bar**:

I hope so :-)



I think that the key to getting everything dialed in is going to be an automated process where we cut something, enter the measurements in Ground Control and it adjusts the internal parameters until things look good. The key is going to be coming up with just the right tests and determining how to teak the parameters as a result.



It seems like cutting the test square (or now the improved method of two lines separated by 3' is a good place to start. Next after that might be straight lines across the whole width.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 18:28:01** by **badger666**:

Replacing the bit with a spring loaded pen or pencil contraption might save a few trees and possibly make calibration more precise.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 19:36:19** by **scottsm**:

...spring loaded pen... my experience with this is that settings that look great with the pen are different, not as accurate, with the router. Maybe the weight, maybe the vibration, it's been disappointing.

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 19:57:02** by **rollandelliott**:

hmm that's interesting. got any pen vs actual cutting side by side photos?

---

Posted on **2017-05-02 21:45:18** by **scottsm**:

No photos. The pens and pencils require a flat surface, so those happen on new stock. Lately I've been making a lot of chips, so I don't have anything flat enough to run a sample 😊

---

Posted on **2017-05-03 05:39:20** by **TomTheWhittler**:

How about a big ball paint marker like this Markal 84623.

http://www.markal.com/ball-paint-marker/

Places like Fastnal, Grainger, and even Ebay have them.

---

Posted on **2017-05-03 07:44:24** by **scottsm**:

Having a ball tip would be a plus. I wonder whether the sled would smear the paint? I use a fiber-tipped one of these to mark the top chain link after the chain measurement cal. step. Add Joanne Fabrics as a source for them - it payed to go with my wife on errands! 

 Maintaining the right pressure against the slightly uneven surface is a design goal. Fine tipped sharpies can get deformed by the pressure and drag of the router. Broader tips give a less precise line, good enough for general shape, but not for fine tuning.

 Advancing the lead of a pencil without disassembling the whole rig is a design goal. Soft leads make a darker line but wear more rapidly, hard leads can be pretty hard to see.

---

